the planet races through space
its orbit is unstable like a pool ball
gliding across the table
looking for a target to collide into
only this ball
is the size of mars and it's going 9 000
miles per hour boom
it crashes into another planet this
mars-sized object
was called thea and what it smashed into
was
earth the impact released 100 million
times more energy than the asteroid that
wiped out the dinosaurs
the planetary collision threw tons of
solid material from both objects out
into space
but only one of the bodies survived thea
was obliterated and then swallowed
entirely by early earth
but that debris didn't go flying
endlessly into the cosmic void
no something crucial happened all those
solid chunks
gathered into a cloud gravity squished
it together
pressing more and more and in the end
our moon was born so goes the theory
at the time of the impact the solar
system was just forming
and this rendezvous of epic proportions
probably wouldn't have happened
if it worked for a newly formed jupiter
throwing theia off its orbit
and straight into earth our young planet
withstood the blow
time passed earth evolved its surface
will become
unrecognizable over the next 4.5 billion
years
it's hard for the human mind to
understand this vast amount of time
so we'll squeeze it all into one day
if midnight is when earth first formed
from gas and dust
that remained after the sun's creation
the next four
hours show a lifeless planet red hot
covered in lava constantly bombarded by
asteroids and
as you know by now even a whole other
planet
yet life finds a way the first cells
appear
it's 4am on the clock at 208 pm
we see the first single-celled organisms
form
it's not until 8 28 pm that sea plants
appear
20 minutes later what's this jellyfish
after them the planet flourishes with
different fish
reptiles insects the forest grow
at 10 30 p.m between 10 56
and 11 40 dinosaurs roamed the earth
the giant lizards ruled our planet for
less than one hour
a minute before the dinosaurs extinction
at 11 39 pm
the first mammals begin to run around
the planet
at 11 58 and 43 seconds humans appear
in the cosmic scale of things we've only
ruled this planet for one minute and 17
seconds
so here's the main question baffling
scientists
why didn't life on earth ever stop it
had
every chance to cease why didn't our
planet become like venus
or mars they both once had an atmosphere
in oceans
today they're lifeless deserts forget
about complex scientific concepts and
theories of the universe's structure
our little rock and all its inhabitants
are just
incredibly lucky professor toby tyrell
at the university of southampton used
computer programs and climate
simulations
to solve the puzzle of why asteroid
collisions in ice ages
didn't turn our little rock into a
lifeless wasteland
the research team took not 10 100
or 1 000 virtual planets similar to
earth
they used 100 000 for the experiment
and every single one of those one
hundred thousand were simulated a
hundred times
they exposed these virtual planets to
different phenomena
they were bombarded by asteroids frozen
exposed to epic eruptions of super
volcanoes that blackened the skies and
blocked the surface from the sun's rays
just 9 or 8 700 of them
were successful one time in 100
simulations
of that group 4 500 planets remain
inhabited
10 times only on one planet
out of 100 000 life didn't stop all 100
times
if life is a lottery earth got extremely
lucky
in 2009 the unique kepler telescope was
launched into space
its task search one patch of the night
sky
or 150 000 stars for rocky earth-like
planets
over nine years in service it ended up
surveying more than 500
000 stars in all that time
with all those observations over nearly
a decade
kepler discovered 2 600 possible
earth-like planets
the weird thing is most of them are a
type you can't find in our own solar
system
there's something between the size of
earth and neptune
but back to the real earth if you go far
from the city and look up at the sky
you'll see an ocean of stars if you're
lucky
and it's a clear night with an unaided
eye you could count a maximum of 2
500 points of light yet there are at
least
100 billion stars in the milky way
some estimates put the numbers of stars
in the milky way up to 400 billion
so where's this giant range coming from
well
counting stars isn't exactly an easy job
scientists obviously don't number each
one individually
1 2 3 and so on you know how long it
takes to count just 1 billion
over 100 years now multiply that by 400.
instead they look at small patches of
space and use some complex scientific
formulas
to make educated guesses of how many
stars there are in total
you can do a similar experiment yourself
imagine a bucket
filled with 10 pounds of rock sand soil
and other items
your job understand how many rocks are
in that mix we'll count only those rocks
that are visible to us from above
get a rough estimate of their volume and
weight what percentage of the total we
can see
and with some calculation you can get a
number
is it exact nah why
because you can't know if the rocks in
the bucket are spread evenly throughout
or if they're all about the same size
throughout
what if the ones at the bottom if there
are any are bigger
or smaller than your sample view they
could have completely different weights
and volumes
that bucket is our milky way galaxy and
the rocks you are counting
are stars the point scientists can't
know for sure how many stars there
really are
maybe 100 billion or perhaps four times
that
of those four billion are like our sign
with our own galaxy the most accepted
estimate for planets that could
potentially support life
is 300 million though as the tradition
of scientific inexactness goes
that number could be up to 5 billion or
more
either way lots of real estate to choose
from
and that's just the milky way but get
this
it's just one of 200 billion galaxies in
the observable universe
the most recent research puts that
number 10 times higher
something like trillions of galaxies in
space and we've only studied less than
10 percent of them
as for how many stars there are in the
universe scientists put it at one
septillion that's one followed by 24
zeros
again it's all estimates because we
can't know for sure
so far one thing is clear our earth is
the only place in the universe that we
know of
where there's life and this planet has
done everything it can to change that
over the past 540 million years
more than 20 major extinction events
have occurred
the last one was 66 million years ago
yep it was the one that took out the
dinosaurs and
75 of all life on this planet for that
matter
an object seven miles across in diameter
smashed into our planet
it was going 120 times faster than the
fastest car today
over 900 thousand miles all around the
impact site
everything caught fire a huge tsunami
swept across the world's oceans
billions of tons of dust and sulfur rose
into the sky
and blocked the sun's warm rays a global
cooling came to earth
a little over 200 million years ago
there was a lesser-known extinction
event that
wiped out half of all life on the planet
most likely volcanoes or an asteroid
strike are to blame
other theories say the movement of
tectonic plates triggered another ice
age
at that time huge crocodiles ruled the
earth
they disappeared and new animals entered
the arena of history
dinosaurs but the worst this planet has
ever seen
was the permian triassic event about 250
million years ago
eighty percent of marine life seventy
percent of land animals and plants
all gone volcanoes spewed out a colossal
amount of lava
where modern-day siberia is but it
affected the entire planet
around 445 million years ago the
dominant life form on our planet was
marine invertebrates
there was only one continent gondwana
and plants were just starting to
flourish on land
but something happened that took out 75
to 85 percent of all living organisms
it could have been an ice age rising
temperatures or
a more daring theory some think
it could have been a huge star exploding
6 000
light years from earth it launched a jet
like gamma ray burst
that ripped across space and poor little
earth
happened to be in its path it burned off
the ozone layer
instantly yeah we kind of need that
thing to protect us
case in point no matter how much this
planet
or even the universe tries to wipe out
life on earth
which is here in the first place from
unbelievable odds
life always finds a way
[Music]
foreign